The changes this mod makes to the game aren't that many, but being to some key game mechanics they might take some getting used to. I'm writing this guide to lay out some fundamentals so you don't get too frustrated trying to figure this out. So here are seven steps to a technologically advanced colony using _Human Resources_. I hope it helps you!

Keep in mind the mod is still in a beta testing phase, so there might be changes and improvements in the future.

### 1. When you start, your pawns are useless. Get used to it!
This mod's goal is to give you more challenge, and it does that by making everyday tasks on RimWorld a little harder. Every time your colonists try to build, repair, craft or sow something, or even use a weapon, the game will verify if their knowlege allows them to do that. (This only applies to your human colonists, all enemies, visitors and robots should behave normally.) Obviously that will require you to pay close attention to your pawns' capabilities and to who does what. But that also means _access_ to a tecnology is going to play a huge role. Many trivial tasks on a RimWorld game are actually locked behind research projects, and usuallly we don't pay too much attention to that because it comes embedded with the starting scenario or it's easy to research. _Passive Cooler, Complex Furniture, Complex Clothing, Smithing_ and _Stonecutting_ are good examples of fundamental techs you'll suffer without. Just imagine going without early game coolers, beds, tables, clothes, bladed weapons and stone walls and you'll get the picture! Normally, once they are discovered, the capability of producing those things is automatically unlocked for all pawns. If its a starting tech, it's a no-brainer. Well, not anymore! Now it's going to be your job to distribute those capabilites around, and there will be extra steps. Also, since researching is going to be harder, the techs you start with can be the difference between life and death! So...

### 2. Don't rely on their starting knowledge, build a _Study Desk_ as soon as you can.
For every human-like pawn spawned, the game will generate a starting knowledge consisting of some technology expertise and some weapon proficiencies. [This is based on a number of factors](https://github.com/jptrrs/HumanResources/wiki/How-a-pawn's-starting-knowledge-is-generated.) and you can tweak the starting technology pool for your own colonists on the settings panel (Options > Mod Settings > Human Resources), but the procedure is largely randomized and most importantly, **based on the pawns' faction tech level**. This means _tribals_ have a higer chance of getting basic techs and the default _crashlanded_ scenario _New Arrivals_ might be good with eletronics and geothermal power, but they will suck when it comes to building a chair! How to get around this? Well, pay attention to what are the techs you started with, because **your faction's starting techs are always available on the study desk**, even if you don't have the books yet. Therefore, the first order of business is to build one and put them to study and fill the gaps in their knowledge. The starting techs for the vanilla factions should be enough to get you going, but if you fell the need for some other tech right from the start (say, for some modded thing you can't do without), you can edit the scenario you choose before starting the game (Scenario Editor > Edit Mode > Add part > Start with research).

### 3. New tasks to micro-manage. Yay!
Once you build your first study desk, your pawns will be able to start learning and exchanging their particular knowledge. This is done by setting up the appropriate tasks, just like with any other workstation, and assigning your pawns to _Study_ on the work tab. There are some conditions for each task though:

In order to **learn** a new technolgy, it must either be a starting tech for your faction OR have its correspondent book available at your library. It's easy to figure out which ones are available because only discovered techs will show up on the ingredients filter panel (and you must go in there and check the ones you want). Also, if the tech you want your pawn to learn has one or more pre-requisites, your colonist must already know all of those!  Let's say, for example, you need your builder to learn how to build solar panels, which requires prior knowledge of _Eletricity_. Even if eletricity is a given starting tech for your faction, he won't be able to learn _Solar Panel_ if he personally doesn't already know eletricity fully. Good news is the pawn learns a technology twice as fast if he already knows one of its branches, so someone who already knows all about solar panels can easily grasp the details of eletricity. You can, of course, check what each pawn knows on the _Tech Tab_ before assigning them to the task. To make it easier for you to control which techs each pawn should learn, I recommend setting up the bill to specific pawns instead of leaving it for "Any Worker". If you use [Better Workbench Management](https://steamcommunity.com/sharedfiles/filedetails/?id=935982361) you can even rename the the task to reflect that: "Joe's homework" for example. 

In order for your pawn to _share_ something he or she already knows, the task would be **document technology**. The pawn must, obviously, know the desired tech already, and only undiscovered techs will show up on the ingredients filter panel. This is a much longer undertaking and the result will be a technical book. Since it takes a long time - according to the tech being documented - your pawn might decide to take some breaks in the process. Don't worry, the book will remain in an unfinished state until his author gets back to finish it, just like when building other difficult items. When its done, you'll finally have the solid form of a technology, that you can use to spread knowledge around... **once you have a proper library to contain it, of course!** For that reason, I don't recommend ordering document technology tasks before you have built at least your first _Bookshelf_. Your other colonists won't even be able to learn from that book if it's not properly archived in a bookshelf (it turns out they are not very impressed by books that are simply laying around). **I also don't recommend to ever set up the document task to be repeated without having space for the books**, as this would cause your colonists to keep writing the same book over and over again without ever getting anywhere with it.

### 4. Education matters, build a library!
Once you have a bookshelf, your pawns will be able to store their books there. And as soon as they do you'll have officially discovered a new tech! The main purpose for storing books on alphabetically-ordered neatly organized bookshelves, just like in real-world libraries, is to provide a repository of knowledge where everyone can learn new things easily. Your bookshelves connect to the study desk and research benches, and they provide a speed boost to the tasks performed on those stations. The boost is proportional to the number of stored books on the connected bookshelves, so the more well stocked your library is, the faster your pawns will learn and research. 
But there's a catch: if a bookshelf is destroyed, for whatever reason, all its books are dropped and the corresponding techs are removed from your library. Be careful, as books are highly flammable! When they burn, that's literally lost knowledge.

### 5. Weapon proficiency doesn't depend on technology expertise. So prepare your training program!
By that time, if you faced your first raid or tried to assign hunting weapons, its likely you stumbled on the restriction for pawns to only equip weapons they're proficient in. The weapons list your colonists are given when they're created varies [according to their skill, your faction tech level and the settings](https://github.com/jptrrs/HumanResources/wiki/How-a-pawn's-starting-knowledge-is-generated.#weapon-proficiency). If they happen to know how to craft a specific weapon, that weapon will also be included. But from that point on, the lists are separated, **and even the uneducated will be able to learn how to use any weapon**. Just remember that when you put your hands on a shiny new gun or blade, you need to put your pawns to learn that weapon before they can use it. For melee weapons, this is done at the _Training Dummy_, and for ranged ones, at the _Target Stand_. The tasks avaliable on each of them are the same: _learn a new weapon_ and _practice a weapon_. Both require the pawn to be assigned to the _Study_ work type.

In order to **learn how to use a weapon** your pawn needs more than access to the weapon itself, he needs access to the corresponding technology. This means either you already have it on your library **or** your pawn knows it personally. A corresponding technology is the one that unlocks the ability to craft that weapon or the building that is needed to produce it. Use the main research tab to locate the tech you need by typing the weapon name on the search box. Without access to this tech, the pawn simply cannot comprehend how that thing works.

The other training task is to **practice** a weapon. It only applies to weapons your pawn already knows how to use, of course, but exactly what weapon isn't that important. That's because this task's goal is simply to increase your panw's skill in that **type** of weapon. The target stand increases shooting skills and the training dummy increases melee skills. 

### 6. Researching is still a thing.
You'll be able to aquire many technologies from the people you recruit, but that might not be fast enough. So you might still want to build a research bench and assign a researcher. The research benches have been modified to be more compact, so you can easily fit them into your library. You want to do that because they already benefit from the speed boost the bookshelves provide! Their workings have also been changed: they now operate just like any other workstation, where you assign bills for your pawns to follow. Other than that, they keep their base characteristics, including the ability to connect with a multi-analyser. You also still need a Hi-Tech Research Bench and the multi-analyser in order to pursue certain technologies.

When you assign a **research** task, **remember to check the technologies you want researched**, as clicking on the main Research Tab won't do anything anymore. Also, note that when your colonists perform this task, the knowledge they create isn't added to the general colony pool like in vanilla, but to their own personal expertise. In order for them to share what they learned, they need to document it into a book at the study desk.

As you can see, technology improvement for your colony will become it's own **production chain**:

research tech > | document it into a book > | add book to library > | study tech > | do stuff with it.
:---|:---|:---|:---|:---
(research bench)|(study bench)|(book shelf)|(study bench)|(build/repair/grow/craft)

### 7. If everything fails, you can still buy your way into technological advancement.
Some traders sell books you can buy to stock your library. There are specialized caravans and orbital traders who will arrive from time to time and the exotic goods traders will also carry a few books in their inventory. When you visit other settlements, keep an eye for books they might be selling too. There isn't much of case for selling books in a Rimworld, however. People are too much concerned with their own survival.